Replace Joining FETCH with fill fetch streams (#1673)
moq-wg/moq-transport: draft-ietf-moq-transport.md

0}` and `Largest Object` is communicated in SUBSCRIBE_OK. If no content has been
delivered yet, the filter Start Location is {0, 0}.  There is no End Group -
the subscription is open ended. For scenarios where the subscriber intends to
start from more than one group in the future, it can use an AbsoluteStartFill
filter instead.

AbsoluteStartFill (0x3): The filter Start Location is specified explicitly.
There is no End Group - the subscription is open ended. The subscription opens a

> fill fetch stream for already-published objects (see {{fill-semantics}}).

Reviewer: I don't think we define "already-published" objects

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
fill fetch stream for Objects prior to Largest Object (see {{fill-semantics}}).
```

Author: The phrase is used in one other place (FETCH) and SUBSCRIBE uses "newly published".  Subscription Filters talks about "Only objects published or received via a subscription..."

AbsoluteRangeFill (0x4): The filter Start Location and End Group Delta are
specified explicitly. If the specified `End Group Delta` is zero, the remainder
of the Start Location's Group passes the filter. Otherwise, the last Group ID to
be delivered is the Group ID in `Start Location` plus the `End Group Delta`. If
the resulting Group ID would be greater than 2^64 - 1, the endpoint MUST close
the session with a `PROTOCOL_VIOLATION`. The subscription opens a fill fetch

> stream for already-published objects (see {{fill-semantics}}).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
stream for Objects prior to Largest Object (see {{fill-semantics}}).
```

Author: Or Objects with Locations smaller than Largest Object?

RelativeStartFill (0x5): Relative Previous is present. The value N in
Relative Previous determines the Start Location: `{Largest Object.Group - N, 0}`
(N = 0 starts at Largest Object.Group). If N is greater than Largest
Object.Group, the Start Location is `{0, 0}`. There is no End Group - the
subscription is open ended. The subscription opens a fill fetch stream for

> already-published objects (see {{fill-semantics}}).

Reviewer 3: Do we not have a use case for RelativeRangeFill?

Author: I don't think we do?  It can be achieved by sending a REQUEST_UPDATE with an End Group after the Ok with LARGEST_OBJECT.

An endpoint that receives a filter type other than the above MUST close the
session with `PROTOCOL_VIOLATION`.

A publisher MUST NOT send objects from outside the requested range. Every

> subscription filter type yields a satisfiable range (see {{fill-semantics}}).

Reviewer 2: What are we trying to say with this sentence?

Author: I think the AI added it to constrast what we had before (SUBSCRIBE could result in INVALID_RANGE).  But we can remove it.

### Fill Semantics {#fill-semantics}

Fill filter types (AbsoluteStartFill, AbsoluteRangeFill, and
RelativeStartFill) cause the publisher to open a unidirectional stream beginning
with a FETCH_HEADER (see {{fetch-header}}) to deliver already-published objects.
This is called a fill fetch stream.

The fill fetch stream carries objects from the fill Start Location up to and
including the fill boundary. The fill boundary is the Largest Object, or the End
Group if one is specified and it precedes the Largest Object. The subscriber
learns the Largest Object from the `LARGEST_OBJECT` parameter in SUBSCRIBE_OK or
REQUEST_UPDATE_OK. For RelativeStartFill, both sides compute the fill Start
Location as `{Largest Object.Group - N, 0}`. For any fill filter type, if the
Start Location is after the Largest Object the fill range is empty, the
publisher does not open a fill fetch stream, and the subscription proceeds

> live-only. If the End Group precedes the Largest Object, only the fill fetch

Reviewer 2: I don't think we define live-only, so how about dropping this last clause.

```suggestion
publisher does not open a fill fetch stream. If the End Group precedes the Largest Object, only the fill fetch
```

stream delivers objects and the subscription remains open (for example, for a
later REQUEST_UPDATE).

The fill fetch stream inherits the subscription's parameters, including
subscriber priority and authorization; a FILL_PARAMETERS parameter (see
{{fill-parameters}}) MAY override individual parameters for the fill fetch
stream. FILL_TIMEOUT (see {{fill-timeout}}) applies to fill fetch streams in the
same way it applies to a FETCH.

The FETCH_HEADER on the fill fetch stream carries the Request ID of the message
that initiated it: the SUBSCRIBE Request ID for the initial fill, or the
REQUEST_UPDATE Request ID for a subsequent fill. A subscription can have
multiple fill fetch streams open at once, each identified by its Request ID;
opening a new fill fetch stream does not implicitly cancel any previously opened
fill fetch stream.

Because the subscription filter necessarily overlaps the fill fetch range, an
object can be delivered both on the fill fetch stream and via subgroups or

> datagrams.

Reviewer 3: I'm a little confused by this paragraph here. While it is true that the subscription filter can overlap with the fill fetch range, I don't see how an object can be delivered on both. For example, let's say:
- Subscriber asks for RelativeStartFill N=0.
- Publisher says LARGEST_OBJECT = {10, 20}.

Then, the filter start is {10, 0} and the fill range is {10, 0} to {10, 20}. These overlap. However, this doesn't mean that an object can be sent on both. Any objects after {10, 20} would be sent on a subgroup. What am I missing here? Can you give me an example where an object is sent on both?

Author: Publisher sends 10,0 and 10,1 to relay, but 10,0 is delayed (different stream/datagrams)
Relay has received object 10,1
SUBSCRIBE RelativeStartFill(0) --> fill range is 10,0-10,1; subscription filter is 10,0 - MAX
Relay sends FETCH upstream for 10,0-10,1, delivers response on fill fetch stream.
Object 10,0 arrives at relay, passes filter --> delivered.

Note this was also possible before with Joining FETCH and e.g. AbsoluteStart* filters.

Reviewer 3: Ah, I see. Thanks for that explanation.

> datagrams.

Reviewer 2: I think there are ways this can be avoided, such as specifying an infinite delivery timeout and 0 Fill timeout?  Is that worth mentioning?

Author: I'm inclined to leave it without more text, but not strongly so.

#### Opening and Closing Fill Fetch Streams

A publisher opens a fill fetch stream when it processes a SUBSCRIBE or
REQUEST_UPDATE that specifies a fill filter type (a SUBSCRIPTION_FILTER with a
fill filter type) while Forward State is 1.

- A fill filter specified while Forward State is 0 opens no fill fetch stream.
  Transitioning to Forward State 1 without re-specifying the fill filter does
  not open one either.
- A REQUEST_UPDATE that does not specify a fill filter type, or that specifies
  one whose Start Location does not add objects beyond an earlier fill (for

>   example, one that only changes the End Group), does not open a new fill fetch

Reviewer 3: "changes the End Group" sounds wrong here, because one could increase the end group and cause more objects to be added beyond an earlier fill.

Author: You are right.  Maybe "one that only decreases the End Group" ?

Reviewer 3: Yeah, that works.

  stream.
- When Forward State transitions to 0, or the subscription is cancelled with
  STOP_SENDING on the bidi stream, the publisher MUST reset any open fill fetch
  streams.

The publisher signals that the fill is complete by closing the stream with a FIN
once all objects up to and including the fill boundary have been
delivered. Because there is no REQUEST_ERROR associated with a fill fetch
stream, the publisher signals a fill failure by resetting the stream; it can

> open a fill fetch stream and reset it immediately after the FETCH_HEADER if

Reviewer 2: If we don't use reliable reset for this, I believe it's possible to never get a FETCH_HEADER for a fill, which seems like it could be very confusing?

Are there specific cases you have in mind where the fill independently fails but the subscription doesn't?  Maybe a timeout case?

Author: > If we don't use reliable reset for this, I believe it's possible to never get a FETCH_HEADER for a fill, which seems like it could be very confusing?

This is already true of standalone FETCH.  Do you want a fix in this PR?

> Are there specific cases you have in mind where the fill independently fails but the subscription doesn't?Maybe a timeout case?

I dunno - upstream publisher reset the fill?

Author: See #632

equal to Start Location and strictly less than or equal to the End Group (when

> present) pass the filter.

Author: ```suggestion
present) pass the filter.  A publisher MUST NOT send objects from outside the requested range.
```

equal to Start Location and strictly less than or equal to the End Group (when
present) pass the filter.

An object published or received in a subgroup or datagram is

> **subscription-delivered**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**subscription-delivered**. Objects delivered via a fill-fetch stream
{fill-semantics} are **fill-delivered**.
```

equal to Start Location and strictly less than or equal to the End Group (when
present) pass the filter.

An object published or received in a subgroup or datagram is

> **subscription-delivered**.

Reviewer 4: You should probably define "subscription-delivered" and "fill-delivered" in the same place, otherwise it's confusing.

0}` and `Largest Object` is communicated in SUBSCRIBE_OK. If no content has been
delivered yet, the filter Start Location is {0, 0}.  There is no End Group -
the subscription is open ended. For scenarios where the subscriber intends to
start from more than one group in the future, it can use an AbsoluteStartFill
filter instead.

AbsoluteStartFill (0x3): The filter Start Location is specified explicitly.
There is no End Group - the subscription is open ended. The subscription opens a

> fill fetch stream for the fill range (see {{fill-semantics}}).

Author: ```suggestion
fill fetch stream for the fill range, if any (see {{fill-semantics}}).
```

AbsoluteRangeFill (0x4): The filter Start Location and End Group Delta are
specified explicitly. If the specified `End Group Delta` is zero, the remainder
of the Start Location's Group passes the filter. Otherwise, the last Group ID to
be delivered is the Group ID in `Start Location` plus the `End Group Delta`. If
the resulting Group ID would be greater than 2^64 - 1, the endpoint MUST close

> the session with a `PROTOCOL_VIOLATION`. The subscription opens a fill fetch

Reviewer: Prefer not to add Protocol violation atleast for the new text and say it as Subscription Error ?

Reviewer: eventhough we cover fill range being empty case in "fill-semantics", it would be nice to have one liner that there will be no fill stream if start location is greater than largest object

Author: > Prefer not to add Protocol violation atleast for the new text and say it as Subscription Error ?

This is an avoidable encoding error and all of these are session ending protocol violations.

Reviewer: I still feel this can be a subscrption error as it affects just this subscription and not the entire session

Author: > I still feel this can be a subscrption error as it affects just this subscription and not the entire session

The same is true if e.g. your parameters on request A have invalid delta encoding -- that is also a session error.  Let's keep things consistent.  Loud mistakes in avoidable cases get fixed faster.

> stream for the fill range (see {{fill-semantics}}).

Reviewer: same comment, we need tell there is no fill stream if the start is > than the start location

Reviewer: did we make the suggested change ? May be I am not seeing it

> stream for the fill range (see {{fill-semantics}}).

Author: ```suggestion
stream for the fill range, if any (see {{fill-semantics}}).
```

> RelativeStartFill (0x5): Relative Previous is present. The value N in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
RelativeStartFill (0x5): Relative Previous MUST be provided. The value N in
```

Author: I don't think that's a good use of MUST.

Reviewer: please explain

Author: We're talking about an optional field in a struct, of which we have dozens.  For consistency, throughout the doc, we just say e.g. "when the subgroup header has the priority bit set, the priority field is present" rather than, "when the subgroup header has the priority bit, the sender MUST send priority field".

Another way to think about it, we are specifying the rules for how things are _decoded_.  We could just as well say, the sender MUST encode everything properly.

To some degree it's a stylistic choice, but I have a strong preference.

specified explicitly. If the specified `End Group Delta` is zero, the remainder
of the Start Location's Group passes the filter. Otherwise, the last Group ID to
be delivered is the Group ID in `Start Location` plus the `End Group Delta`. If
the resulting Group ID would be greater than 2^64 - 1, the endpoint MUST close
the session with a `PROTOCOL_VIOLATION`. The subscription opens a fill fetch
stream for the fill range (see {{fill-semantics}}).

RelativeStartFill (0x5): Relative Previous is present. The value N in
Relative Previous determines the Start Location: `{Largest Object.Group - N, 0}`
(N = 0 starts at Largest Object.Group). If N is greater than Largest
Object.Group, the Start Location is `{0, 0}`. There is no End Group - the
subscription is open ended. The subscription opens a fill fetch stream for the
fill range (see {{fill-semantics}}).

An endpoint that receives a filter type other than the above MUST close the
session with `PROTOCOL_VIOLATION`.

If the publisher cannot satisfy the requested Subscription Filter (see
{{subscription-filter}}) or if the entire End Group has already been published
it SHOULD send a REQUEST_ERROR with code `INVALID_RANGE`.  A publisher MUST

> NOT send objects from outside the requested range.

Reviewer: why did we delete this ? Isn't this true still ?

Author: Only the last sentence is still true -- it was moved below.

Reviewer: The deleted text is still relevant though

Author: The deleted text is no longer applicable.

> If the publisher cannot satisfy the requested Subscription Filter (see
> {{subscription-filter}}) or if the entire End Group has already been published
> it SHOULD send a REQUEST_ERROR with code `INVALID_RANGE`. 

When the End Group has already been published, the entire range is in the past, and. is satisfied by fill-fetch.  This is not an INVALID_RANGE.

Regarding "if the publisher cannot satisfy the range": I guess we could keep this bit.  I can imagine an application that knows eg track groups all end at group 100, so a request for group 200 is INVALID_RANGE.

> A publisher MUST NOT send objects from outside the requested range.

Reviewer: This seems to be misplaced i think. This should be where the range filters are defined ?

Reviewer: looks like we resolved it without moving it ?

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

> is the Largest Object, or the End Group when one is specified with a Location

Reviewer: I think we should clarify that is the  largest object "at the time of request",

Reviewer: on "the End Group when one is specified with a Location"  --> this is true only if end group is lesser than Largest Object.

Reviewer 5: +1. The boundary should be pinned to the Largest Object at the time the request is received, because Largest Object is otherwise a moving target. Concretely: every Group before the Largest Object is fill-delivered, and every Group from the Largest Object onward is subscription-delivered. Making this explicit removes the ambiguity.

Author: > on "the End Group when one is specified with a Location" --> this is true only if end group is lesser than Largest Object.

Already stated if you read the rest of the sentence:

> or the End Group when one is specified with a Location less than the Largest Object.

> is the Largest Object, or the End Group when one is specified with a Location

Author: ```suggestion
is the Largest Object at the time the Location Filter is received, or the End Group when one is specified with a Location
```

> less than the Largest Object. The subscriber

Reviewer 5: While the fill fetch stream is being delivered, the subscription delivers live objects (above the boundary) at the same time. The relay/publisher behavior during this window is not described, and it depends on Group Order:

- Ascending: older fill groups must precede live groups, so the relay has to buffer incoming live objects while the fill drains.
- Descending: live groups go first and fill groups last, so the relay must keep the fill objects in cache until they are delivered (they must not be evicted).

Could we specify this? It belongs here in fill-semantics and is inherited by the switch modes (see #1675).

Author: @gwendalsimon it is specified in this PR in the priority section.

> later REQUEST_UPDATE).

Reviewer: We need some recommdation on what the subscriber should do when it doesn't want subscription to be opened ?. Should we just say in that case use standalone FETCH .

Having said that, i do feel this is not a useful functonalit to keep subscripion opened.  Since one can setup a DOS of fill fetches and have these subscriptions opened for a good amount of time .

Reviewer 5: +1. If a subscriber sends a SUBSCRIBE whose Objects are all in the past — by mistake, or because it does not know the Largest Object — it should have used a FETCH. I do not see the value in keeping the subscription open in that case. I would prefer to close the subscription.

Author: I thought we discussed this in London and rough consensus was it should stay open.  This is what differentiates SUBSCRIBE with fill-fetch from standalone FETCH. What if subscriber used FILL_TIMEOUT 0, got unknown status for missing objects, which will later come via subscribe?

Reviewer: > What if subscriber used FILL_TIMEOUT 0, got unknown status for missing objects, which will later come via subscribe?

FILL_TIMEOUT of 0 is an indication saying I don't care if you can't get it immediately. Go ahead with subscription for me.  It doesn't mean that don't ever send me those objects in the requested range. Yes the objects can come later and if it matches the filter, it still needs to be forwarded.

Author: > Yes the objects can come later and if it matches the filter, it still needs to be forwarded.

This confirms you want to keep the SUBSCRIBE open.

The fill fetch stream inherits the subscription's parameters, including
subscriber priority and authorization; a FILL_PARAMETERS parameter (see
{{fill-parameters}}) MAY override individual parameters for the fill fetch
stream. FILL_TIMEOUT (see {{fill-timeout}}) applies to fill fetch streams in the
same way it applies to a FETCH.

The FETCH_HEADER on the fill fetch stream carries the Request ID of the message
that initiated it: the SUBSCRIBE Request ID for the initial fill, or the
REQUEST_UPDATE Request ID for a subsequent fill. A subscription can have
multiple fill fetch streams open at once, each identified by its Request ID;
opening a new fill fetch stream does not implicitly cancel any previously opened

> fill fetch stream.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
fill fetch streams.
```

Reviewer: This seems fine. Should we add any text on "if the fill parameters and range is exactly same the publisher should return error and also any non-normative text or security considerations text for duplicate and overlapping fill ranges ?

Author: >  Should we add any text on "if the fill parameters and range is exactly same the publisher should return error and also any non-normative text or security considerations text for duplicate and overlapping fill ranges ?

No, I don't think so. Just like it's not an error to send 100 overlapping standalone FETCHes.

An object delivered on the fill fetch stream is **fill-delivered**. Because the
subscription filter necessarily overlaps the fill range, an object can be both
fill-delivered and subscription-delivered. A subscriber can avoid duplicate
delivery by setting FILL_TIMEOUT to 0 in FILL_PARAMETERS (see {{fill-timeout}}):
the fill fetch stream then carries only objects that are immediately available.

#### Opening and Closing Fill Fetch Streams

A publisher opens a fill fetch stream when it processes a SUBSCRIBE or
REQUEST_UPDATE that specifies a fill filter type (a SUBSCRIPTION_FILTER with a
fill filter type) while Forward State is 1.

- A fill filter specified while Forward State is 0 opens no fill fetch stream.
  Transitioning to Forward State 1 without re-specifying the fill filter does

>   not open one either.

Reviewer: I missed this originally. This changes semantics for sub and fill for when fwd state transitions. 

Sub, fwd=0 , filter-type xyz
ReqUpd , fwd=1 --> xyz still holds

SubWithFill, fwd=0 , filter-type xyz
ReqUpd , fwd=1 --> need to respecify xyz

Reviewer 5: +1. I do not understand why the fill filter must be re-specified. If a subscription has a fill range at Forward State 0 and later moves to Forward State 1, why re-send the filter? For RelativeStartFill the filter already says "when it is time to start, give me N groups before now", and the Largest Object needed to resolve it is returned in REQUEST_UPDATE_OK at that moment, so the fill could be resolved automatically.

Also, what happens if the filter is not re-specified? As written, no fill fetch stream opens, so the fill range is silently dropped and only live objects are sent. Is that intended?

Author: fill-fetch is for _joining live_.  If you set forward=0, you are not joining live -> you do not need a filter _at all_, it has no effect.  So you are not _respecifying_ so much as you are specifying it.

The reason for this behavior is you don't want simply flipping foward=0/1 to resend objects you got originally.

> Also, what happens if the filter is not re-specified? As written, no fill fetch stream opens, so the fill range is silently dropped and only live objects are sent. Is that intended?

This is the correct read and the intent.

Author: ```
Sub, fwd=0 , filter-type xyz
ReqUpd , fwd=1 --> xyz still holds

SubWithFill, fwd=0 , filter-type xyz
ReqUpd , fwd=1 --> need to respecify xyz
```

I would't characterize it like this.  Sub and SubWithFill -> the live filter holds for both when you flip forward 0/1.  You only need to respecify the filter if you want a fill-fetch stream.

Reviewer: There is just a subscription which as optional fill property. I want my forwarding state-machine for subscription to have a single semantic.

Author: > I want my forwarding state-machine for subscription to have a single semantic.

I think that's true.  Forward and Location are independent, and sending the filter in an update is what triggers a fill.

When you receive a REQUEST_UPDATE with no new filter (eg only forward=1) it does exactly what you expect --> change the forward flag.

If you receive a REQUEST_UPDATE with a new Location filter RelativePrevFill(0) and Forward=1 -> this flips the flag (for subscribe) and spawns the fill-fetch you need to join.

- A REQUEST_UPDATE that does not specify a fill filter type, or that specifies
  one whose Start Location does not add objects beyond an earlier fill (for
  example, one that only decreases the End Group), does not open a new fill fetch

>   stream.

Reviewer: this is fine, but we also need to say, the boundary needs to be updated too. This statement by in itself implies the old boundary still applies.

Author: I'm not following your comment here @suhasHere.  The boundary is important because it defines the end of a fill fetch.  In this case, there is no (new) fill-fetch.  For example, if you subscribe AbsoluteStartFill 10,0, then later send REQUEST_UPDATE AbsoluteRangeFill 10,0, End Group Delta 5 --> it only wants to set the End, not open a new fill-fetch.

- When the subscription is cancelled with STOP_SENDING on the bidi stream, the
  publisher MUST reset any open fill fetch streams.

The publisher signals that the fill is complete by closing the stream with a FIN
once all objects up to and including the fill boundary have been
delivered. Because there is no REQUEST_ERROR associated with a fill fetch

> stream, the publisher signals a fill failure by resetting the stream; it can

Reviewer: what classifies as "fill failure" ..The reason i wonder is, if there are few cases an explicit error is useful and we are not missing it due to merging joining fetch behavior.

Reviewer 5: +1, "fill failure" needs to be defined. As a solution: since the only signal is a stream reset, could the reset carry a code that conveys the reason? RESET_STREAM already carries a stream reset error code, so if we define reset codes for the fill failure cases (for example an equivalent of INVALID_RANGE or not-found), the subscriber would learn why the fill failed, without needing a REQUEST_ERROR channel.

Author: > what classifies as "fill failure"

I'll ask those with relays that implement fetch to enumerate the cases.  I think in my relay, such a fill fails when

1) there's no upstream publisher for this namespace/track (but that can't happen with fill-fetch, the SUBSCRIBE would _also_ fail.
2) the upstream FETCH returns REQUEST_ERROR
3) the upstream FETCH data stream is reset

There's a joining fetch specific case which is that the subscription has no content and RelativePrevFill is specified.

open a fill fetch stream and reset it immediately after the FETCH_HEADER if
necessary. A subscriber can cancel a fill fetch stream independently by sending
STOP_SENDING on it. Resetting or cancelling a fill fetch stream, by either

> endpoint, does not affect the subscription, which continues to deliver objects

Reviewer: for my understanding, cancelling here is only applicable for the receiver side right ?

Author: The publisher could reset the fill-fetch stream if it encounters an error.

Reviewer: We don't have an error indication in the current machinery for fill fetch streams in this case ?

Author: RESET_STREAM carries an error.  This is the same as Joining FETCH when the error happens post FETCH_OK.

be delivered is the Group ID in `Start Location` plus the `End Group Delta`. If
the resulting Group ID would be greater than 2^64 - 1, the endpoint MUST close
the session with a `PROTOCOL_VIOLATION`. The subscription opens a fill fetch
stream for the fill range (see {{fill-semantics}}).

RelativeStartFill (0x5): Relative Previous is present. The value N in
Relative Previous determines the Start Location: `{Largest Object.Group - N, 0}`
(N = 0 starts at Largest Object.Group). If N is greater than Largest
Object.Group, the Start Location is `{0, 0}`. There is no End Group - the
subscription is open ended. The subscription opens a fill fetch stream for the
fill range (see {{fill-semantics}}).

An endpoint that receives a filter type other than the above MUST close the
session with `PROTOCOL_VIOLATION`.

A publisher MUST NOT send objects from outside the requested range.

### Fill Semantics {#fill-semantics}

Fill filter types (AbsoluteStartFill, AbsoluteRangeFill, and
RelativeStartFill) cause the publisher to open a unidirectional stream beginning
with a FETCH_HEADER (see {{fetch-header}}) and delivered as a FETCH response (see
{{message-fetch}}). This is called a fill fetch stream.

> The fill fetch stream carries the fill range: the objects from the fill Start

Reviewer 4: "carries the fill range" is ambiguous and could imply that we actually communicate the range on the wire (which we currently don't).

Just remove `the fill range:`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The fill fetch stream carries the objects from the fill Start
```

stream delivers objects and the subscription remains open (for example, for a
later REQUEST_UPDATE).

The fill fetch stream inherits the subscription's parameters, including
subscriber priority and authorization; a FILL_PARAMETERS parameter (see
{{fill-parameters}}) MAY override individual parameters for the fill fetch
stream. FILL_TIMEOUT (see {{fill-timeout}}) applies to fill fetch streams in the
same way it applies to a FETCH.

The FETCH_HEADER on the fill fetch stream carries the Request ID of the message
that initiated it: the SUBSCRIBE Request ID for the initial fill, or the
REQUEST_UPDATE Request ID for a subsequent fill. A subscription can have
multiple fill fetch streams open at once, each identified by its Request ID;
opening a new fill fetch stream does not implicitly cancel any previously opened
fill fetch stream.

An object delivered on the fill fetch stream is **fill-delivered**. Because the
subscription filter necessarily overlaps the fill range, an object can be both
fill-delivered and subscription-delivered. A subscriber can avoid duplicate
delivery by setting FILL_TIMEOUT to 0 in FILL_PARAMETERS (see {{fill-timeout}}):

> the fill fetch stream then carries only objects that are immediately available.

Reviewer 4: I am confused.  Currently, when doing joining FETCH, one would typically set "Latest Object" for SUBSCRIBE, to avoid double-filling on FETCH.  I assumed that this is what this PR does, but it clearly does not do that, so this seems like a downgrade.

Author: This is what we discussed yesterday in the call; we decided that we would land as-is and fix forward when you @mzanaty switch from enums to location filters (e.g. allow you to specify a different range in fill vs subscribe).  Or would you prefer I allow SUBSCRIPTION_FILTER in fill?

Reviewer: Fill semantics text clearly says where is the start and where is the end. I don't think it a object can be both fill delivered and subscription delivered.

Reviewer 5: +1. This paragraph is hard to understand, because it never explains what the duplicated Object is.

Author: > Fill semantics text clearly says where is the start and where is the end. I don't think it a object can be both fill delivered and subscription delivered.

Concretely:

Cache has Group 10, objects 0 and 2.
Largest Object 10,2
10,1 is _in flight_
SUBSCRIBE, RelativePrevFill(0), FILL_TIMEOUT is non-zero

This sets the subscription filter to 10- and opens a fill-fetch stream.
It finds the cache gap at 10,1 it sends a FETCH upstream.
10,1 arrives, passes filter -> delivered (1st time)
Upstream FETCH delivers another copy of 10,1 -> put in fill fetch stream (2nd time).

Victor's solution handles it -- if you are worried about this case, set a different subscribe filter (Largest Object) and FILL_PARAMS filter (RelativePrev(0)).

Reviewer: Cache has Group 10, objects 0 and 2.
Largest Object 10,2
10,1 is in flight

-> hwo does this happen with streams  

Not sure what is Victor's solution ?

Author: > Not sure what is Victor's solution ?

Allow the filter for fill to be separate from the filter for subscription.  I think we need to do this.

When EndObject is omitted, the filter includes all objects in the End Group.

> A publisher MUST NOT send subscription-delivered objects from outside the

Author: ```suggestion
A Location Filter on a subscription is always valid, even if it specifies a range
entirely before Largest Object.

A publisher MUST NOT send subscription-delivered objects from outside the
```

> requested range.  Fill-delivered objects are governed by the Location filter in

Reviewer 4: This might not be directly related to this PR (feel free to move this to a separate issue if necessary), but I do think we should clarify that the subscribers MUST handle objects out of range gracefully, since things like updating filters is async.

> requested range.  Fill-delivered objects are governed by the Location filter in

Author: ```suggestion
requested range.  Because updating filters is asynchronous,
subscribers can receive objects outside the current filter.

Fill-delivered objects are governed by the Location filter in
```

FILL_PARAMETERS (see {{fill-semantics}}).

### Fill Semantics {#fill-semantics}

A subscription that carries a FILL_PARAMETERS parameter (see
{{fill-parameters}}) causes the publisher to open a unidirectional stream
beginning with a FETCH_HEADER (see {{fetch-header}}) and delivered as a FETCH
response (see {{message-fetch}}).  This is called a fill fetch stream.

The **fill range** is the range of Locations selected by the Location filter
inside FILL_PARAMETERS, or the subscription's Location filter if it is

> omitted. The filter is evaluated using the rules for a Fetch in

Author: subscription location in the past is never an error (clarified above) -- it can be updated, and objects smaller than Largest Object can arrive later.

if fill is in the future, you won't get a full fetch stream (you can tell from Largest Object.  I added it below.

{{location-filters}}, so the fill range never extends beyond `Largest

> Object`. When the subscription has no Location filter, or the LOCATION_FILTER

Author: From FETCH:

> Objects with Locations larger than the Largest Object at the time the request is processed will not be retrieved by a FETCH. If the requested End Location exceeds the Largest Object, the actual end of the FETCH response is indicated in the FETCH_OK End Location.

inside FILL_PARAMETERS is zero-length, the fill range is the entire track up to
`Largest Object`.  The subscriber learns the `Largest Object` from the
`LARGEST_OBJECT` parameter in SUBSCRIBE_OK or REQUEST_UPDATE_OK.

Because the fill range is specified independently of the subscription's
Location filter, a subscriber can retrieve a range of Groups prior to the live
edge while the subscription itself starts at the Next Group.  If the fill range

> is empty, the publisher does not open a fill fetch stream.

Author: ```suggestion
edge while the subscription itself starts at the Next Group.  If the fill range
is empty, or starts after Largest Object, the publisher does not open a fill fetch stream.
```

> is empty, the publisher does not open a fill fetch stream.

Author: This isn't quite right - if the fetch results in no objects, e.g. because the range covers a known gap, you _do_ get a fetch stream, that is empty.

The fill fetch stream inherits the subscription's parameters, including

> subscriber priority and authorization; parameters carried inside

Reviewer 4: Also range filters?

> subscriber priority and authorization; parameters carried inside

Author: ```suggestion
subscriber priority, range filters and authorization; parameters carried inside
```

FILL_PARAMETERS override them for the fill fetch stream.  FILL_TIMEOUT (see
{{fill-timeout}}) applies to fill fetch streams in the same way it applies to a
FETCH.

The FETCH_HEADER on the fill fetch stream carries the Request ID of the message
that initiated it: the SUBSCRIBE Request ID for the initial fill, or the
REQUEST_UPDATE Request ID for a subsequent fill.  A subscription can have

> multiple fill fetch streams open at once, each identified by its Request ID;

Author: I'm not sure we need the parenthetical.

> multiple fill fetch streams open at once, each identified by its Request ID;

Author: ```suggestion
REQUEST_UPDATE Request ID for a subsequent fill.  As a result of
REQUEST_UPDATE, a subscription can have
multiple fill fetch streams open at once, each identified by its Request ID;
```

opening a new fill fetch stream does not implicitly cancel any previously
opened fill fetch streams.

An object delivered on the fill fetch stream is **fill-delivered**.  When the
fill range overlaps the subscription's Location filter, an object can be both
fill-delivered and subscription-delivered.  A subscriber that wants each Object
delivered exactly once specifies a fill range that ends immediately before the

> start of the subscription's Location filter.

Reviewer 6: I'm a bit lost - I suspect I am missing how this works. Solving this with no extra RTT was the whole point of Joining  Fetch

> start of the subscription's Location filter.

Author: The text isn't quite right - a fill-fetch stream is always clamped to Largest Object, so the subscriber can use an open-ended Location Filter in FILL_PARAMS, which achieves the joining fetch use case without an RTT penalty.

> start of the subscription's Location filter.

Author: ```suggestion
fill-delivered and subscription-delivered.  A subscriber that wants each Object
delivered exactly once uses the Next Object Subscription Location Filter coupled
with an open-ended fill range, which the publisher will end at Largest Object.
```

#### Opening and Closing Fill Fetch Streams

A publisher opens a fill fetch stream when it processes a SUBSCRIBE or
REQUEST_UPDATE that carries FILL_PARAMETERS while Forward State is 1.

- FILL_PARAMETERS carried while Forward State is 0 opens no fill fetch stream.
  Transitioning to Forward State 1 without re-sending FILL_PARAMETERS does not
  open one either.
- A REQUEST_UPDATE that does not carry FILL_PARAMETERS does not open a new fill
  fetch stream.
- When the subscription is cancelled with STOP_SENDING on the bidi stream, the

>   publisher MUST reset any open fill fetch streams.

Reviewer 6: This seems like really deep layer violation. I don't think we should be using transport level signal to change what is happening on a whole other transaction. I would prefer some sort of applications stop

>   publisher MUST reset any open fill fetch streams.

Author: ```suggestion
- When the subscription is cancelled, the publisher MUST reset any open fill fetch streams.
```

The publisher signals that the fill is complete by closing the stream with a
FIN once all objects in the fill range have been delivered.  Because there is
no REQUEST_ERROR associated with a fill fetch stream, the publisher signals a

> fill failure by resetting the stream; it can open a fill fetch stream and reset

Author: ```suggestion
fill failure by resetting the stream; it MUST open a fill fetch stream and reset
```

it immediately after the FETCH_HEADER if necessary.  A subscriber can cancel a

> fill fetch stream independently by sending STOP_SENDING on it.  Resetting or

Reviewer 6: trivial note but would be clearer to replace the "it" with something to make it clear

> fill fetch stream independently by sending STOP_SENDING on it.  Resetting or

Author: ```suggestion
fill fetch stream independently using STOP_SENDING.  Resetting or
```

request an existing Group or wait for a future Group.  Different applications
will have different approaches for when to begin a new Group.

To join a Track immediately, the subscriber sends a SUBSCRIBE with Filter Type
`Largest Object`. Delivery begins with the next Object and can begin mid-group.

To join a Track at the current Group, the subscriber sends a SUBSCRIBE with
Filter Type `RelativeStartFill` and Relative Previous N = 0, which fills the
current Group from its start.

To join a Track at a past Group, the subscriber sends a SUBSCRIBE with a fill
filter type (AbsoluteStartFill, AbsoluteRangeFill, or RelativeStartFill). The
publisher delivers the fill range, and objects with larger Locations in a

> subgroup or datagram (see {{fill-semantics}}).

Reviewer: this seesm incomplet. subgroup/datagrams are only applicable for latest object onwards , rest is FILL FETCH stream. The way it is states mixes a few ideas ..

> subgroup or datagram (see {{fill-semantics}}).

Author: ```suggestion
publisher delivers the fill range via a fill-fetch stream, and newly published or received objects in a
subgroup or datagram (see {{fill-semantics}}).
```

This includes all Range Filters {{range-filters}} and Location
Filters {{location-filters}}, which can be evaluated in any order.
The Forward parameter is also a type of filter.  The publisher MUST

> forward only subscription-delivered objects that pass all filters.

Reviewer 4: I am a bit confused, don't range filters also apply to fetches and fills?

> forward only subscription-delivered objects that pass all filters.

Author: ```suggestion
forward only objects that pass all filters.
```

request an existing Group or wait for a future Group.  Different applications
will have different approaches for when to begin a new Group.

To join a Track immediately, the subscriber sends a SUBSCRIBE with a Location
Filter {{location-filters}} that starts at the Next Object.  Delivery begins

> with the next Object and can begin mid-group.

Reviewer 4: Should this discuss Next Object vs no filter at all?

> 1. If two objects have the same subscriber priority, but different publisher

Reviewer 3: nit: "1" is appearing twice here

   priorities, the one with **the highest publisher priority** is scheduled to be
   sent first.

2. If two objects in the same subscription have the same subscriber and
   publisher priority, but belong to two different groups of the same track,
   **the group order** of the subscription is used to decide the one that is

>    scheduled to be sent first. When a subscription fill's Group Order differs

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure what to change, but I almost missed the difference between these.

   from the subscription's Group Order, the live-delivered object is scheduled
   first.

> 3. If two objects in the same subscription have the same subscriber

Reviewer 2: I was going to say that two objects in the same subscription have to have the same subscriber priority, but I guess the Fetch Fills can have a different priorities?

Also, I don't think we can consider the publisher priority here, because I believe it risks a case where a lower priority Object indefinitely favors the Subscribe Objects over the fill stream, but we need the rest of the fill stream Objects to start playing.

In other words, if the Current Group is delivered via fill and Subscribe delivery, I think fill always needs to win, probably regardless of Subscriber priority as well?

Author: > I was going to say that two objects in the same subscription have to have the same subscriber priority, but I guess the Fetch Fills can have a different priorities?

Yes.  #1642 only allowed a single subscriber priority for the subscription and it's filles, but the wg wanted more knobs.

> Also, I don't think we can consider the publisher priority here, because I believe it risks a case where a lower priority Object indefinitely favors the Subscribe Objects over the fill stream, but we need the rest of the fill stream Objects to start playing.

Within a given subgroup, there's only a single publisher priority.  So it can't be different for live vs fill?

> In other words, if the Current Group is delivered via fill and Subscribe delivery, I think fill always needs to win, probably regardless of Subscriber priority as well?

I think if someone does a fill-fetch and gives live a higher numeric priority than fill, it's weird, but do we need to explicitly disallow?

   and publisher priority and belong to the same group of the same track, and
   one is delivered by the fill fetch stream while the other is delivered by the
   live subscription, the fill-delivered object is scheduled first. Otherwise,
   the one with **the lowest Subgroup ID** (for objects with forwarding preference
   Subgroup), or **the lowest Object ID** (for objects with forwarding preference
   Datagram) is scheduled to be sent first.  If the two objects have
   different Forwarding Preferences the order is implementation dependent.

Within the same group, fill-delivered objects win the tie-break over

> live-delivered objects (rule 3) because objects before the fill boundary are

Reviewer 2: This is another use of "live-" which we don't use in the document today.  I'm hesitant to use the word live, because it could be ambiguous, but if we want to use it, I think we should define it.

Author: Maybe "subscription-delivered" or "newly published"?

1. If two objects have different subscriber priorities associated with them,
   the one with **the highest subscriber priority** is scheduled to be sent first.

> 2. If two objects have the same subscriber priority, but different publisher

Reviewer: is this change relevant to this PR ?

Author: Not exactly but since I'm changing the same priority list it seemed harmless.

   priorities, the one with **the highest publisher priority** is scheduled to be
   sent first.
3. If two objects in the same subscription have the same subscriber and
   publisher priority, but belong to two different groups of the same track,
   **the group order** of the subscription is used to decide the one that is
   scheduled to be sent first. When a subscription fill's Group Order differs
   from the subscription's Group Order, the subscription-delivered object is scheduled

>    first.

Reviewer: not sure I understand this . Are we assuming here that, there is an old object from past and a object in live edge are present to pick to send next ?

Author: > If two objects in the same subscription have the same subscriber and publisher priority, but belong to two different groups of the same track,

So let's say it's 9,15 and 10,20

> **the group order** of the subscription is used to decide the one that is scheduled to be sent first.

Great.  So if they both had ascending -> 9 goes first.  If they both had descending, 10 goes first.

> When a subscription fill's Group Order differs from the subscription's Group Order, the subscription-delivered object is scheduled first.

So if Fill is Descending and Live is Ascending (Inside out), 10 wins.  If Fill is Ascending and Live is Descending - you are doing it wrong, no one has a use case.

4. If two objects in the same subscription have the same subscriber
   and publisher priority and belong to the same group of the same track, and
   one is delivered by the fill fetch stream while the other is
   subscription-delivered, the fill-delivered object is scheduled first. Otherwise,
   the one with **the lowest Subgroup ID** (for objects with forwarding preference
   Subgroup), or **the lowest Object ID** (for objects with forwarding preference
   Datagram) is scheduled to be sent first.  If the two objects have
   different Forwarding Preferences the datagram is sent first.

Within the same group, fill-delivered objects win the tie-break over
subscription-delivered objects (rule 4) because objects with smaller Locations

> are assumed to be needed before those with larger Locations.

Reviewer: Just to be clear, when there is live edge in progress, a fill-delivered object will be sent first and live object will follow later. 

This is fine, but its an assumption of application behavior. This needs to be better controlled by fill vs subscriber priority parameter though

Author: > Just to be clear, when there is live edge in progress, a fill-delivered object will be sent first and live object will follow later.

yes

> This is fine, but its an assumption of application behavior. 

It also follows from fill / live being split on object ID, which is also a sort key for priority.  This is the "10A before 10B" rule the group discussed in London.

> This needs to be better controlled by fill vs subscriber priority parameter though

Which is completely possible as written.  The priority space is large enough that you could have all live be odd and all fill be live - 1, so live _always_ wins.

1. If two objects have different subscriber priorities associated with them,
   the one with **the highest subscriber priority** is scheduled to be sent first.
2. If two objects have the same subscriber priority, but different publisher
   priorities, the one with **the highest publisher priority** is scheduled to be
   sent first.
3. If two objects in the same subscription have the same subscriber and

>    publisher priority, but belong to two different groups of the same track,

Reviewer 4: I assume if they're in the same subscription, they by definition have the same subscriber priority?

(actually, why was this changed?)

Author: only changed "same subscription"

available publishers using the same matching rules as SUBSCRIBE. When more than
one publisher is available, the Relay MAY send the FETCH to any of them.

When a Relay receives a SUBSCRIBE with a fill filter type, it serves the fill
portion from its cache and retrieves any missing objects upstream using

> SUBSCRIBE or FETCHes (see {{fill-semantics}}).

Author: ```suggestion
a SUBSCRIBE with fill or FETCHes (see {{fill-semantics}}).
```

available publishers using the same matching rules as SUBSCRIBE. When more than
one publisher is available, the Relay MAY send the FETCH to any of them.

When a Relay receives a SUBSCRIBE with a fill filter type, it serves the fill
portion from its cache and retrieves any missing objects upstream using

> SUBSCRIBE or FETCHes (see {{fill-semantics}}).

Reviewer: missing objects can only be obtained via FETCH .

Author: > missing objects can only be obtained via FETCH .

Not anymore ;)  SUBSCRIBE + a fill type can fill-fetch them.

Reviewer: I agree, but this is very underspecified for Subscribe case .

### FILL TIMEOUT Parameter {#fill-timeout}

> The FILL_TIMEOUT parameter (Parameter Type 0x0A) MAY appear in a FETCH message,

Reviewer 2: Do we need to nest this param, even if it is specific to the fetch?

Author: It could go either way, but it's specific to the fill portion, so I'm inclined to keep it here -- it makes it more clear that the non-nested block only contains subscribe things.

encoding. It MAY appear in a SUBSCRIBE, PUBLISH_OK or REQUEST_UPDATE (for a
subscription) message. It is a Subscription Filter (see {{subscription-filters}}).

> Fill filter types (AbsoluteStartFill, AbsoluteRangeFill, RelativeStartFill)

Reviewer 2: Isn't this an issue for any filter?  It seems cleaner to only allow the Filter to change in REQUEST_UPDATE.  If so, we could fix that in a separate PR.

Author: There's only 5 filter types in this version, and we just excluded 3 of them.  Largest Object and Next Group are fine though?

MUST NOT appear in PUBLISH_OK. A publisher that receives a
PUBLISH_OK with one of these filter types MUST close the session with
`PROTOCOL_VIOLATION`. The LARGEST_OBJECT in PUBLISH may be stale by the time
PUBLISH_OK is processed, making the fill boundary unreliable.
To fill-join a track initiated via PUBLISH, the
subscriber SHOULD respond with PUBLISH_OK with Forward State 0, then send
REQUEST_UPDATE with Forward State 1 and a fill filter type. The
REQUEST_UPDATE_OK will contain a fresh LARGEST_OBJECT establishing the correct
fill boundary.

If omitted from SUBSCRIBE or PUBLISH_OK, the subscription is unfiltered: it
passes all Objects published or received from the time of subscription. If
omitted from REQUEST_UPDATE, the value is unchanged.

> ### FILL PARAMETERS Parameter {#fill-parameters}

Reviewer 2: As I've said before, I am not convinced we need this.  I'm happy to land it and then I'll file an issue to better understand if we need this functionality.

I do think we can keep FILL_TIMEOUT in the existing location.  Allowing it to appear here and in the regular parameter list seems potentially confusing.

Author: We already have the "nested" concept via immutable properties, so I find this a bit cleaner than the alternative, which is duplicating parameter names, which also seems more error prone.  Curious to get broader feedback though, I'd rather be done than have a particular spelling.

The FILL_PARAMETERS parameter (Parameter Type 0x23) uses length-prefixed
encoding. It MAY appear in a SUBSCRIBE or REQUEST_UPDATE (for a subscription)
message. Its value is a block of Key-Value Pairs (see {{moq-key-value-pair}})
that apply to the fill fetch stream of a subscription using a fill filter type
(see {{fill-semantics}}).

The following parameters MAY appear inside FILL_PARAMETERS:

| Parameter Type | Parameter Name | Specification |
|----------------|----------------|---------------|
| 0x0A | FILL_TIMEOUT | {{fill-timeout}} |

> | 0x20 | SUBSCRIBER_PRIORITY | {{subscriber-priority}} |

Reviewer 2: If I have two FETCH streams outstanding, and I update the fill fetch priority, do both of them get reprioritized?

Author: Interesting quandary: you can specify a different subscriber priority for fill-fetch initially, but there is no way to update it.  Either the REQUEST_UPDATE updates just the subscription, or all of them.  I'd be inclined to keep it simple and pick one of these two.

### GROUP ORDER Parameter {#group-order}

The GROUP_ORDER parameter (Parameter Type 0x22) is a uint8. It MAY appear in a
SUBSCRIBE, SUBSCRIBE_TRACKS, or FETCH, or inside a FILL_PARAMETERS parameter

> (see {{fill-parameters}}).

Reviewer: Even though Nesting seems natural .. this is getting bit clunky to all subscribe params instead/repeated in FILL PARAMS

Author: I don't disagree, but we discussed 7/6 and everyone agreed that nesting was the best solution given other constraints.

encoding. It MAY appear in a SUBSCRIBE, PUBLISH_OK or REQUEST_UPDATE (for a
subscription) message. It is a Subscription Filter (see {{subscription-filters}}).

If omitted from SUBSCRIBE or PUBLISH_OK, the subscription is

> unfiltered.  If omitted from REQUEST_UPDATE, the value is unchanged.

Reviewer: I think this is a behavior good to have ? any reason why we are removing it ?

Author: Not removed, just moved.

PUBLISH_OK with one of these filter types MUST close the session with
`PROTOCOL_VIOLATION`. The LARGEST_OBJECT in PUBLISH may be stale by the time
PUBLISH_OK is processed, making the fill boundary unreliable.
To fill-join a track initiated via PUBLISH, the
subscriber SHOULD respond with PUBLISH_OK with Forward State 0, then send
REQUEST_UPDATE with Forward State 1 and a fill filter type. The
REQUEST_UPDATE_OK will contain a fresh LARGEST_OBJECT establishing the correct

> fill boundary.

Reviewer: this is a new complexity . most of the sub-ns flows are publish driven and they all need to do additional round trip . Not sure if we got chance to share this with the larger group?

Author: It's not an additional round trip, since the REQUEST_UPDATE can go in the same packet as PUBLISH_OK.  If you were using Joining FETCH here it would be identical (you learn the real largest object in FETCH_OK.

Yes it was shared with the group.  See slide 7 from the London deck: https://datatracker.ietf.org/meeting/interim-2026-moq-08/materials/slides-interim-2026-moq-08-sessa-the-new-joining-fetch-00

Reviewer: Thanks for the reference, I did miss it. This may become easier with location filter , where pub_ok with fill can just say to the latest .

Author: > Thanks for the reference, I did miss it. This may become easier with location filter , where pub_ok with fill can just say to the latest .

Sadly, it won't.  The problem is structural when the publisher sends PUBLISH with forward=1.  Largest Object is _unknown_, and requires another message from the publisher.

Author: I believe we discussed in Vienna and agreed that we don't want PUBLISH_OK to contain any subscription modifying params, and this is aligned with that.

If omitted from SUBSCRIBE or PUBLISH_OK, the subscription is unfiltered: it
passes all Objects published or received from the time of subscription. If

> omitted from REQUEST_UPDATE, the value is unchanged.

Reviewer: the last statement is not true. Since earlier we do say that, if fill filter type is not specified in the REQUEST_UPDATE, we do cancel the filter type sent in the original SUBSCRIBE

Author: @suhasHere can you link the specific text you think is in conflict?  Sending a REQUEST_UPDATE with no filter has no effect - no fill fetch, no cancellation, no filter change.

(see {{moq-key-value-pair}}), otherwise the endpoint MUST reject this with
REQUEST_ERROR with error code INVALID_FILTER. See {{range-filters}}.

### FILL PARAMETERS Parameter {#fill-parameters}

The FILL_PARAMETERS parameter (Parameter Type 0x23) uses length-prefixed
encoding. It MAY appear in a SUBSCRIBE or REQUEST_UPDATE (for a subscription)
message. Its value is a block of Key-Value Pairs (see {{moq-key-value-pair}})
that apply to the fill fetch stream (see {{fill-semantics}}).  Its presence is
what requests a fill fetch stream; a subscription with no FILL_PARAMETERS
opens none.

The following parameters MAY appear inside FILL_PARAMETERS:

> | Parameter Type | Parameter Name | Specification |

Reviewer 4: Range filters?

|----------------|----------------|---------------|
| 0x0A | FILL_TIMEOUT | {{fill-timeout}} |
| 0x20 | SUBSCRIBER_PRIORITY | {{subscriber-priority}} |
| 0x21 | LOCATION_FILTER | {{location-filter}} |

> | 0x22 | GROUP_ORDER | {{group-order}} |

Author: ```suggestion
| 0x22 | GROUP_ORDER | {{group-order}} |
| 0x25 | SUBGROUP_FILTER | {{range-filters}} |
| 0x26 | OBJECTID_FILTER | {{range-filters}} |
| 0x27 | PRIORITY_FILTER | {{range-filters}} |
| 0x28 | OBJECT_PROPERTY_FILTER | {{range-filters}} |
```

* Parameters: The parameters are defined in {{message-params}}.

### Updating Subscriptions {#updating-subscriptions}

When a subscriber decreases the Start Location of the Subscription Filter
(see {{subscription-filters}}), the Start Location can be smaller than the Track's
Largest Location, similar to a new Subscription. The publisher delivers the new

> fill range by opening a new fill fetch stream (see {{fill-semantics}}).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Largest Location, similar to a new Subscription. If a fill filter is specified, the publisher
delivers the new fill range by opening a new fill fetch stream (see {{fill-semantics}}).
```

* Parameters: The parameters are defined in {{message-params}}.

### Updating Subscriptions
### Updating Subscriptions {#updating-subscriptions}

When a subscriber decreases the Start Location of the Subscription Filter
(see {{subscription-filters}}), the Start Location can be smaller than the Track's
Largest Location, similar to a new Subscription. FETCH can be used to retrieve

> any necessary Objects smaller than the current Largest Location.

Reviewer: the FETCH statement is still true , regardless of fill filter type.

Author: But it's no longer exclusive (SUBSCRIBE with fill fetch can _also_ do that) and I don't think the reader is not losing anything with this sentence gone.

it can choose to stop sending objects (and thus send PUBLISH_DONE) for any
reason.

A publisher MAY delay sending PUBLISH_DONE after the end of a Track if it
intends to allow subscribers to request fills (see {{fill-semantics}}) of the
completed Track. PUBLISH_DONE ends the subscription, after which no further fill

> fetch streams can be opened.

Reviewer: not sure this is even needed to say this. This is too application specific

Author: I think it's important to highlight the option of delaying PUBLISH_DONE, and the only reason to do that is to allow more REQUEST_UPDATEs that change fill-fetch filters (nothing else is coming live).

Reviewer: I see the intent, but still don't think it is needed. An application will do this if it wants to without having this text

* End Location: The end Location, plus 1. A Location.Object value of 0
  means the entire group is requested.

> ### Joining Fetches

Reviewer 6: Given many people are using joining fetch today, I think we should keep it for now. After we have more experence with Fill, we could consider deprecating joining fetch but I think that should be a seperate decision

Author: Please refer to the 7/6 minutes: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/minutes-interim-2026-moq-18-202607061630/

> Conclusion: Sentiment is to remove it. Alan to follow up with chairs offline. Decision must be final by draft-20 (before interop target). People can bake off draft-18 vs. draft-20 if desired.

I will defer to the chairs @martinduke @gloinul

it can choose to stop sending objects (and thus send PUBLISH_DONE) for any
reason.

A publisher MAY delay sending PUBLISH_DONE after the end of a Track if it
intends to allow subscribers to request fills (see {{fill-semantics}}) of the
completed Track. PUBLISH_DONE ends the subscription, after which no further fill

> fetch streams can be opened.

Author: ```suggestion
```
